--- Chunk 1 ---
Prostate cancer
A guide if you ve just
been diagnosed
2 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
About this booklet
This booklet is for anyone who s recently been diagnosed with
prostate cancer. Your partner, family or friends might also find
it helpful. We explain what prostate cancer is, the tests you
may have to diagnose it, and the treatment options available.
There s also information about where you can get support if
you need it.
Each hospital will do things slightly differently. Use this booklet
as a general guide to what to expect and ask your doctor
or nurse for more details about your care and the support
available to you. You can also speak to our Specialist Nurses,
in confidence, on 0800 074 8383 or chat to them online.
This booklet is also available in large print.
The following symbols appear throughout the booklet:
Our Specialist Nurses
Our publications
Sections for you to fill in
Watch online at prostatecanceruk.org
You can use this booklet as your personal
--- Chunk 2 ---
.
The following symbols appear throughout the booklet:
Our Specialist Nurses
Our publications
Sections for you to fill in
Watch online at prostatecanceruk.org
You can use this booklet as your personal guide and write
down any information that might be helpful to you in the
blue shaded areas towards the back.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 3
Contents
About this booklet 2
..............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
If you ve just been diagnosed with prostate cancer 4
......................................................
What is the prostate? 5
............................................................................................................................................................................................................................
What is prost
--- Chunk 3 ---
..........................................................................................................................................................................................
What is prostate cancer? 6
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................
How is prostate cancer diagnosed? 8
...........................................................................................................................................
What do my test results mean? 10
..............................................................................................................................................................
What are my treatment options? 24
.......................................................................................................................................................
Dealing with prostate cancer 40

--- Chunk 4 ---
ent options? 24
.......................................................................................................................................................
Dealing with prostate cancer 40
...........................................................................................................................................................................
Sections for you to fill in
What are my test results? 47
....................................................................................
Who are my team members? 49
...........................................................................
Questions to ask your doctor or nurse 51
..................................................
Appointment diary 52
. .......................................................................................................
More information from us 54
.......................................................................................................................................
--- Chunk 5 ---
....................................
More information from us 54
..............................................................................................................................................................................................
Other useful organisations 55
........................................................................................................................................................................................
About us 57
...........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................
4 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
If you ve just been diagnosed with
prostate cancer
If you ve just been diagnosed with prostate cancer, you might feel
scared, worried, stressed or even angry. Your feelings may 
--- Chunk 6 ---
ve just been diagnosed
If you ve just been diagnosed with
prostate cancer
If you ve just been diagnosed with prostate cancer, you might feel
scared, worried, stressed or even angry. Your feelings may change
over time. There s no right way to feel and everyone reacts in their
own way.
When you re told you have cancer, it can be a shock and you might
find it difficult to take everything in. Thinking about your cancer
and possible treatments can be stressful and you may have lots
of questions. You may also feel anxious about the future and how
having prostate cancer will affect your life and your loved ones.
There are people who are there to support you as well as things
you can do to help yourself. You might find it helpful to read about
prostate cancer and treatment options. And you can read more about
getting support on page 44, or speak to our Specialist Nurses.
Families can also find this a difficult time and they may need
support and information too. They may want to read our bookle
--- Chunk 7 ---
d more about
getting support on page 44, or speak to our Specialist Nurses.
Families can also find this a difficult time and they may need
support and information too. They may want to read our booklet,
When you re close to someone with prostate cancer: A guide
for partners and family.
I called the Specialist Nurses on the day I
was diagnosed. They talked me through the
scenarios and possible treatments.
A personal experience
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 5
What is the prostate?
The prostate is a gland. It is usually the size and shape of a walnut
and grows bigger as you get older. It sits underneath the bladder
and surrounds the urethra, which is the tube that carries urine
(wee) out of the body. The prostate s main job is to help make
semen   the fluid that carries sperm.
Who has a prostate?
The following people have a prostate:
  men
  trans women*
  non-binary people who were registered male at birth**
  some intersex people.***
Trans, non-binary or intersex?
--- Chunk 8 ---
 sperm.
Who has a prostate?
The following people have a prostate:
  men
  trans women*
  non-binary people who were registered male at birth**
  some intersex people.***
Trans, non-binary or intersex?
The information in this booklet has been developed based
on guidance and evidence in men. If you are a trans woman,
non-binary registered male at birth or intersex, some of this
information may still be relevant to you   but your experience
may be slightly different. For more information visit
prostatecanceruk.org/trans-women
* A trans woman is someone who was registered male at birth and identifies as a woman. Trans
women can develop prostate problems, even if they have taken hormones, or if they have had
genital reconstructive surgery. The prostate is not removed during this surgery.
** A non-binary person does not identify as a man or a woman.
*** An intersex person may have both male and female sexual characteristics and so might have
a prostate.
6 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve ju
--- Chunk 9 ---
on-binary person does not identify as a man or a woman.
*** An intersex person may have both male and female sexual characteristics and so might have
a prostate.
6 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Where is the prostate?
bladder
urethra
prostate
penis
testicles
What is prostate cancer?
Normally, the growth of all cells is carefully controlled in the body.
As cells grow old and die, new cells take their place. Cancer can
develop when cells start to grow in an uncontrolled way. If this
happens in your prostate, you have prostate cancer.
Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the UK.
About 1 in 8 men in the UK will be diagnosed with prostate cancer
at some point in their lives.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 7
How cancer develops
Normal cells Cancer cells growing in
an uncontrolled way
Most prostate cancer grows slowly or doesn t grow at all. It may
never cause any problems or shorten a man s life. But some
prostate cancer does grow q
--- Chunk 10 ---
ells Cancer cells growing in
an uncontrolled way
Most prostate cancer grows slowly or doesn t grow at all. It may
never cause any problems or shorten a man s life. But some
prostate cancer does grow quickly and is more likely to spread to
other parts of the body and cause problems. This needs treatment
to help prevent the cancer from spreading.
Most men with early prostate cancer don t have any symptoms.
One reason for this is the way the cancer grows. You ll usually only
get early symptoms if the cancer grows near the tube you urinate
through (the urethra) and presses against it, changing the way you
urinate (wee). But because prostate cancer usually starts to grow
in a different part of the prostate, early prostate cancer doesn t
often press on the urethra and cause symptoms.
Some men have tests for prostate cancer because they had
urinary problems. But urinary problems are usually caused by other
things that aren t cancer.
Find out more about prostate cancer by watching our
online v
--- Chunk 11 ---
ve tests for prostate cancer because they had
urinary problems. But urinary problems are usually caused by other
things that aren t cancer.
Find out more about prostate cancer by watching our
online video, Understanding your prostate cancer at
prostatecanceruk.org/just-diagnosed-video
8 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
How is prostate cancer diagnosed?
Prostate cancer is diagnosed using a number of tests, which we
describe on the following pages. You might have already had some
of these, but you may need further tests to find out whether the
cancer has spread and how aggressive it is (how likely it is to grow
and spread). You may not need to have all of these tests, and you
might not have them in this order. Read more about these tests in
our fact sheet, How prostate cancer is diagnosed.
Prostate specific antigen (PSA) blood test
This is a test that measures the amount of prostate specific antigen
(PSA) in your blood. PSA is a protein produced by normal cells in
yo
--- Chunk 12 ---
ancer is diagnosed.
Prostate specific antigen (PSA) blood test
This is a test that measures the amount of prostate specific antigen
(PSA) in your blood. PSA is a protein produced by normal cells in
your prostate and also by prostate cancer cells. It s normal to have
a small amount of PSA in your blood, and the amount rises as
you get older. A raised PSA level can be caused by a number of
things including age, a urine infection, an enlarged prostate and
prostate cancer.
Digital rectal examination (DRE)
This is where the doctor or nurse feels your prostate through the
wall of the back passage (rectum). They ll wear gloves and put
some gel on their finger to make it more comfortable. They ll feel
your prostate for any hard or lumpy areas and to get an idea of
its size. Some men find the idea of having a DRE embarrassing or
even upsetting. There s no right or wrong way to feel about this,
and it s your choice whether or not you have a DRE.
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan
This creates
--- Chunk 13 ---
of having a DRE embarrassing or
even upsetting. There s no right or wrong way to feel about this,
and it s your choice whether or not you have a DRE.
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan
This creates a detailed picture of your prostate and the surrounding
tissues. In many hospitals you may have a special type of MRI
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 9
scan, called a multi-parametric MRI (mpMRI). You may have had
an MRI scan to help your doctor decide whether you needed a
biopsy (see below), or to decide which areas of the prostate to
take the biopsy samples from. An MRI scan may also be used after
a biopsy has found cancer, to see if the cancer has spread outside
the prostate.
Prostate biopsy
This involves using a thin needle to take small pieces of tissue from
the prostate. The tissue is then looked at under a microscope to
check for cancer.
CT (computerised tomography) scan
This can show whether the cancer has spread outside the
prostate, for example to the lymph 
--- Chunk 14 ---
tate. The tissue is then looked at under a microscope to
check for cancer.
CT (computerised tomography) scan
This can show whether the cancer has spread outside the
prostate, for example to the lymph nodes or nearby bones. Lymph
nodes are part of your immune system and are found throughout
your body.
Bone scan
This can show whether any cancer cells have spread to your
bones. A small amount of a safe radioactive dye is injected into a
vein in your arm before you have the scan. If there is any cancer in
the bones, the dye will collect in these areas and show up on
the scan.
PET (positron emission tomography) scan
At some hospitals, you may be offered a PET scan. This can be
used to check if cancer has spread to the bones, lymph nodes and
other tissues. But it s more commonly used if your doctor suspects
your cancer has come back after treatment, rather than when you
are first diagnosed.
10 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
What do my test results mean?
Your doctor wil
--- Chunk 15 ---
tor suspects
your cancer has come back after treatment, rather than when you
are first diagnosed.
10 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
What do my test results mean?
Your doctor will use all your test results to find out if the cancer has
spread and how quickly it is growing. Ask your doctor or nurse to
explain your test results if you don t understand them. You can also
read more in our fact sheet, How prostate cancer is diagnosed,
or speak to our Specialist Nurses.
PSA blood test results
It s normal to have a small amount of PSA in your blood, and the
amount rises as you get older. Other things can raise your PSA
level, including prostate cancer. But not all men with prostate
cancer have a raised PSA level. You may have had a PSA test
showing your PSA was raised, and then had other tests to
diagnose your prostate cancer.
MRI scan results
A specialist called a radiologist looks at your MRI scan images.
They specialise in diagnosing health problems using X-rays and
s
--- Chunk 16 ---
hen had other tests to
diagnose your prostate cancer.
MRI scan results
A specialist called a radiologist looks at your MRI scan images.
They specialise in diagnosing health problems using X-rays and
scans. Your results will be used to decide if you need a biopsy and
can help your doctor to decide what areas of the prostate to take
biopsy samples from. If you have an MRI scan after a biopsy, the
images will be used to see if your cancer has spread outside
your prostate.
Biopsy results
Biopsy samples are looked at under a microscope to check for any
cancer cells. Your doctor will be sent a pathology report with the
results. The results will show if any cancer was found. They ll also
show how many biopsy samples contained cancer and how much
cancer was in each sample.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 11
You might be sent a copy of the pathology report. And you can ask
to see copies of letters between the hospital and your GP. If you
have trouble understanding any of th
--- Chunk 17 ---
74 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 11
You might be sent a copy of the pathology report. And you can ask
to see copies of letters between the hospital and your GP. If you
have trouble understanding any of the information, ask your doctor
or nurse to explain it or speak to our Specialist Nurses.
Your biopsy results will show how aggressive the cancer is (how
likely it is to grow and spread). You might hear this called your
Gleason grade, Gleason score or grade group.
Gleason grade
Prostate cells seen under the microscope have different patterns,
depending on how quickly they re likely to grow. The pattern
is given a grade from 1 to 5   this is called the Gleason grade.
Grades 1 and 2 are no longer included on pathology reports, as
they are similar to normal cells. If you have prostate cancer, you will
have Gleason grades of 3, 4 or 5. The higher the grade, the more
likely the cancer is to grow and spread.
Gleason score
There may be more than one grade of cancer in the biopsy
samples. Your Glea
--- Chunk 18 ---
will
have Gleason grades of 3, 4 or 5. The higher the grade, the more
likely the cancer is to grow and spread.
Gleason score
There may be more than one grade of cancer in the biopsy
samples. Your Gleason score is worked out by adding together
two Gleason grades.
The first is the most common grade in all the samples. The second
is the highest grade of what s left. When these two grades are
added together, the total is called the Gleason score.
12 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Gleason score = the most common grade + the highest
other grade in the samples
For example, if the biopsy samples show that:
  most of the cancer seen is grade 3, and
  the highest grade of any other cancer seen is grade 4, then
  the Gleason score will be 7 (3 + 4).
A Gleason score of 4 + 3 shows the cancer is more aggressive
than a score of 3 + 4 as there is more grade 4 cancer. If your
Gleason score is made up of two of the same Gleason grades,
such as 3 + 3, this means that no other Glea
--- Chunk 19 ---
ws the cancer is more aggressive
than a score of 3 + 4 as there is more grade 4 cancer. If your
Gleason score is made up of two of the same Gleason grades,
such as 3 + 3, this means that no other Gleason grade was seen
in the biopsy samples.
If you have prostate cancer, your Gleason score will be between 6
(3 + 3) and 10 (5 + 5).
Grade group
Your doctor might also talk about your  grade group . This is a
newer system for showing how aggressive your prostate cancer is
likely to be. Your grade group will be a number between 1 and 5
(see page 13).
What does the Gleason score or grade group mean?
The higher your Gleason score or grade group, the more
aggressive the cancer and the more likely you are to need
treatment to stop the cancer spreading. The table on page 13
describes the different Gleason scores and grade groups that
can be given after a prostate biopsy. This is just a guide. Your
doctor or nurse will talk you through what your results mean.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prosta
--- Chunk 20 ---
eason scores and grade groups that
can be given after a prostate biopsy. This is just a guide. Your
doctor or nurse will talk you through what your results mean.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 13
Grade Gleason Description
group score
1 6 (3 + 3) All of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow very slowly, if at all.
2 7 (3 + 4) Most of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow very slowly. There are
some cancer cells that look likely to grow
at a moderately quick rate.
3 7 (4 + 3) Most of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow at a moderately quick
rate. There are some cancer cells that look
likely to grow very slowly.
4 8 (3 + 5) Most of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow very slowly. There are some
cancer cells that look likely to grow quickly.
8 (4 + 4) All of the cancer cells found in the biopsy look
likely to grow at a moderately quick rate.
8 (5 + 3) Most of the cancer cells found in the 
--- Chunk 21 ---
me
cancer cells that look likely to grow quickly.
8 (4 + 4) All of the cancer cells found in the biopsy look
likely to grow at a moderately quick rate.
8 (5 + 3) Most of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow quickly. There are some
cancer cells that look likely to grow very slowly.
5 9 (4 + 5) Most of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow at a moderately quick
rate. There are some cancer cells that look
likely to grow quickly.
9 (5 + 4) Most of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow quickly. There are some
cancer cells that look likely to grow at a
moderately quick rate.
10 (5 + 5) All of the cancer cells found in the biopsy
look likely to grow quickly.
14 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
What type of prostate cancer do I have?
Your doctor will look at your biopsy results to see what type of
prostate cancer you have. For most men who are diagnosed,
the type of prostate cancer is called adenocarcinoma or acinar
--- Chunk 22 ---
cer do I have?
Your doctor will look at your biopsy results to see what type of
prostate cancer you have. For most men who are diagnosed,
the type of prostate cancer is called adenocarcinoma or acinar
adenocarcinoma   you might see this written on your biopsy
report. There are other types of prostate cancer that are very rare.
If you re told you have a rare type of prostate cancer, read more
on our website at prostatecanceruk.org/rare or speak to our
Specialist Nurses.
What stage is my cancer?
You may need scans to find out the stage of your cancer   in other
words, how far it has spread. Your doctor or nurse will let you
know about any scans you need to have. The results should help
you and your doctor decide which treatments might be suitable
for you.
A common way to record the stage of your cancer is the TNM
(Tumour-Nodes-Metastases) system.
T1 prostate cancer
T2 prostate cancer
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 15
T stage
The T stage shows how far the cancer has 
--- Chunk 23 ---
your cancer is the TNM
(Tumour-Nodes-Metastases) system.
T1 prostate cancer
T2 prostate cancer
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 15
T stage
The T stage shows how far the cancer has spread in and around
the prostate. A MRI scan or DRE is usually used to find out the T
stage, and sometimes a CT scan.
bladder T1
The cancer can t be felt
during a DRE or seen on
scans, and can only be seen
under a microscope.
seminal
vesicle
T1 prostate
prostate cancer
bladder T2
The cancer can be felt
during a DRE or seen on
scans, but is still contained
inside the prostate.
seminal
vesicle
T2 prostate
prostate
cancer
T3 prostate cancer
T4 prostate cancer
16 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
bladder T3
The cancer can be felt
during a DRE or seen
breaking through the
outer layer (capsule) of
seminal the prostate. It may also
vesicle
have spread to the
T3 prostate seminal vesicles.
prostate
cancer
bladder
T4
The cancer has spread to
nearby organs, such as the
bladder, b
--- Chunk 24 ---
 layer (capsule) of
seminal the prostate. It may also
vesicle
have spread to the
T3 prostate seminal vesicles.
prostate
cancer
bladder
T4
The cancer has spread to
nearby organs, such as the
bladder, back passage or
pelvic wall.
seminal
vesicle
T4 prostate
prostate
cancer
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 17
N stage
The N stage shows whether the cancer has spread to the lymph
nodes near the prostate. The lymph nodes near your prostate are
a common place for prostate cancer to spread to. An MRI or CT
scan is used to find out your N stage.
The possible N stages are:
NX The lymph nodes were not looked at, or the scans were unclear.
N0 No cancer can be seen in the lymph nodes.
N1 The lymph nodes contain cancer.
M stage
The M stage shows whether the cancer has spread (metastasised)
to other parts of the body, such as the bones. A bone scan or MRI
is usually used to find out your M stage.
The possible M stages are:
MX The spread of the cancer wasn t looked at, or the scans

--- Chunk 25 ---
ised)
to other parts of the body, such as the bones. A bone scan or MRI
is usually used to find out your M stage.
The possible M stages are:
MX The spread of the cancer wasn t looked at, or the scans
were unclear.
M0 The cancer hasn t spread to other parts of the body.
M1 The cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
If your cancer has spread to other parts of the body (M1), you
will be diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer. M1 is split into
M1a, M1b and M1c.
  M1a means the cancer has spread to lymph nodes outside of
the pelvis
  M1b means the cancer has spread to the bone
  M1c means the cancer has spread to other parts of the body
such as the liver or lungs.
18 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
How prostate cancer spreads
Prostate cancer cells can move to other parts of the body through
the blood. Or they can spread to nearby lymph nodes and then
travel through lymph vessels. Lymph nodes and lymph vessels are
part of your lymphatic system, and are found thr
--- Chunk 26 ---
 parts of the body through
the blood. Or they can spread to nearby lymph nodes and then
travel through lymph vessels. Lymph nodes and lymph vessels are
part of your lymphatic system, and are found throughout your body.
The lymph nodes near the prostate are a common place for prostate
cancer to spread to.
spine
lymph
nodes
lymph
vessel bladder
bones
prostate
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 19
What does my stage mean?
Your TNM stage is used to work out if your cancer is localised,
locally advanced or advanced.
Stage Description T stage N stage M stage
Localised Cancer that s T1 or T2 N0 or NX M0 or
(early) contained inside MX
the prostate.
Locally Cancer that s T1 or T2 N1 M0
advanced started to
break out of
the prostate, T3 or T4 N0 or N1 M0
or has spread
just outside it.
Advanced Cancer that s Any Any M1
(metastatic) spread from T stage N stage
the prostate to
other parts of
the body.
Localised prostate cancer
Localised prostate cancer is cancer that hasn t spread 
--- Chunk 27 ---
t.
Advanced Cancer that s Any Any M1
(metastatic) spread from T stage N stage
the prostate to
other parts of
the body.
Localised prostate cancer
Localised prostate cancer is cancer that hasn t spread outside the
prostate. You may also hear it called early prostate cancer. Many
localised cancers are not aggressive and grow slowly or not at all.
They may not cause any problems or shorten your life.
Slow-growing localised prostate cancer may not need to be
treated and can often be monitored instead. But some localised
cancers may grow more quickly and spread to other parts of
the body. These cancers are more likely to cause problems and
need to be treated.
20 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Treatments for localised prostate cancer usually aim to get rid of
the cancer. What you are offered will depend on how likely your
cancer is to grow and spread outside your prostate (see below).
Read more in our fact sheet, Localised prostate cancer.
Locally advanced prostate canc
--- Chunk 28 ---
at you are offered will depend on how likely your
cancer is to grow and spread outside your prostate (see below).
Read more in our fact sheet, Localised prostate cancer.
Locally advanced prostate cancer
Locally advanced prostate cancer is cancer that s started to break
out of the prostate, or has spread to the area just outside it. It can
spread to the outer layer of the prostate (prostate capsule), seminal
vesicles, bladder, back passage, pelvic wall or lymph nodes near
your prostate. You might have treatment to get rid of the cancer
or to keep it under control. Your treatment options will depend
on how far the cancer has spread. Read more in our fact sheet,
Locally advanced prostate cancer.
Cambridge Prognostic Group (CPG)
If you have localised or locally advanced prostate cancer, your
doctor may talk to you about the risk of your cancer spreading
outside of the prostate. To work out your risk, your doctor will look
at your PSA level, your Gleason score (or grade group), and the
T st
--- Chunk 29 ---
octor may talk to you about the risk of your cancer spreading
outside of the prostate. To work out your risk, your doctor will look
at your PSA level, your Gleason score (or grade group), and the
T stage of your cancer. These three factors will place you in one
of five categories that form the Cambridge Prognostic Group
(CPG). This system is used to help your doctor decide which
treatment options are suitable for you, based on your risk.
The CPG system does not apply if you have advanced prostate
cancer (cancer that s spread from the prostate to other parts of
the body). See page 23 for more information about advanced
prostate cancer.
The five CPG categories are described on the next page. If you
have any questions about your CPG speak to your doctor or
specialist nurse.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 21
CPG 1
  Gleason score 6 (grade group 1), and
  PSA less than 10 ng/ml, and
  T stage of 1 or 2.
This means your cancer is likely to grow very slowly and very
unli
--- Chunk 30 ---
0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 21
CPG 1
  Gleason score 6 (grade group 1), and
  PSA less than 10 ng/ml, and
  T stage of 1 or 2.
This means your cancer is likely to grow very slowly and very
unlikely to spread. Your treatment options may include active
surveillance, surgery and radiotherapy.
CPG 2
You will be in this group if you have a T stage of 1 or 2 and
one of the following:
  Gleason score is 3 + 4 = 7 (grade group 2), or
  PSA 10 to 20 ng/ml.
This means your cancer is likely to grow slowly and unlikely to
spread. Your treatment options may include active surveillance,
surgery, or radiotherapy with hormone therapy.
CPG 3
  Gleason score 3 + 4 = 7 (grade group 2), and
  PSA 10 to 20 ng/ml, and
  T stage of 1 or 2.
You will also be in this group if you have:
  Gleason 4 + 3 = 7 (grade group 3), and
  T stage of 1 or 2.
This means there is a medium (intermediate) risk of your cancer
growing and spreading out of your prostate. Your treatment
options may include surgery or radiot
--- Chunk 31 ---
rade group 3), and
  T stage of 1 or 2.
This means there is a medium (intermediate) risk of your cancer
growing and spreading out of your prostate. Your treatment
options may include surgery or radiotherapy with hormone
therapy. You may also have active surveillance if you don t want
treatment straight away or can t have treatment.
22 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
CPG 4
You will be in this group if you have only one of the following:
  Gleason score 8 (grade group 4), or
  PSA more than 20 ng/ml, or
  T stage 3.
This means that there is a high risk of your cancer growing
quickly and spreading out of your prostate. Treatment options
may include surgery or radiotherapy, with hormone therapy.
CPG 5
You will be in this group if you have two or more of
the following:
  Gleason score 8 (grade group 4), and
  PSA more than 20 ng/ml, and
  T stage 3.
You will also be in this group if you have one of the following:
  Gleason score 9 to 10 (grade group 5), or
  T Stage 4.
--- Chunk 32 ---
leason score 8 (grade group 4), and
  PSA more than 20 ng/ml, and
  T stage 3.
You will also be in this group if you have one of the following:
  Gleason score 9 to 10 (grade group 5), or
  T Stage 4.
This means that there is a high risk of your cancer growing
quickly and it s very likely to spread. Treatment options may
include surgery or radiotherapy with hormone therapy.
Low, medium or high risk prostate cancer
When talking to your doctor about the risk of your cancer
spreading, they may refer to low, medium or high risk. This older
system also used your PSA level, Gleason score and the T stage of
your cancer. You should ask your doctor about your CPG category
and what this means in terms of your treatment options.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 23
Advanced prostate cancer
Advanced prostate cancer is cancer that has spread from the
prostate to other parts of the body. Prostate cancer can spread
to any part of the body, but it most commonly spreads to the
bones 
--- Chunk 33 ---
e cancer
Advanced prostate cancer is cancer that has spread from the
prostate to other parts of the body. Prostate cancer can spread
to any part of the body, but it most commonly spreads to the
bones and lymph nodes. You might hear cancer that has spread
called metastatic prostate cancer, secondary prostate cancer,
secondaries, metastases or mets.
It s not possible to cure advanced prostate cancer, but treatments
can keep it under control, often for years.
Advanced prostate cancer can cause symptoms, such as
fatigue (extreme tiredness), pain in the back, hips or pelvis,
and problems urinating. There are treatments available to help
manage these symptoms.
Read more in our fact sheet, Advanced prostate cancer.
24 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
What are my treatment options?
Your treatment options will depend on a number of things, including:
  the stage of your cancer (whether it is localised, locally advanced
or advanced) (see page 19)
  how likely your cancer is 
--- Chunk 34 ---
ions?
Your treatment options will depend on a number of things, including:
  the stage of your cancer (whether it is localised, locally advanced
or advanced) (see page 19)
  how likely your cancer is to grow and spread
  your general health.
We ve included a summary of the main treatments for prostate
cancer on page 25. Some of these treatments may not be suitable
for you, so talk to your doctor or nurse about which ones you can
have. There s more information about choosing a treatment on
page 35.
Ask your doctor or nurse to mark which treatments might be
suitable for you. Read more about all of the available treatments
on the following pages.
I m pretty sure I would have had this
treatment anyway, but I think I would have
benefited from learning more about the
options available.
A personal experience
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 25
Treatment options
Localised Active surveillance
prostate Watchful waiting
cancer Surgery (radical prostatectomy)
External beam radi
--- Chunk 35 ---
l experience
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 25
Treatment options
Localised Active surveillance
prostate Watchful waiting
cancer Surgery (radical prostatectomy)
External beam radiotherapy (sometimes with
hormone therapy)
Brachytherapy (either permanent seed or
high dose-rate)
High-intensity focused ultrasound, but this isn t
very common
Cryotherapy, but this isn t very common
Locally External beam radiotherapy with hormone
advanced therapy (and sometimes with brachytherapy)
prostate Hormone therapy alone, sometimes
cancer with chemotherapy
Surgery (radical prostatectomy)
Watchful waiting
Advanced Chemotherapy with hormone therapy
prostate Hormone therapy alone
cancer Radiotherapy with hormone therapy and
sometimes chemotherapy
Further treatments to control advanced
prostate cancer
Treatments to manage the symptoms of
advanced prostate cancer
26 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Active surveillance
This is a way of monitoring localised prostate c
--- Chunk 36 ---
state cancer
Treatments to manage the symptoms of
advanced prostate cancer
26 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Active surveillance
This is a way of monitoring localised prostate cancer that s likely
to be slow-growing. The aim is to avoid or delay unnecessary
treatment in men with localised prostate cancer that is unlikely
to spread. This means you can avoid or delay the possible side
effects of treatment.
Active surveillance involves monitoring your cancer with regular
tests, including PSA tests, MRI scans and biopsies, rather than
treating it straight away. Ask your doctor or nurse what to expect.
If the tests show your cancer may be growing, or if you decide
you want treatment, you ll be offered treatment that aims to get
rid of the cancer completely, such as surgery, external beam
radiotherapy or brachytherapy.
Active surveillance is suitable for men with CPG 1 or 2 localised
prostate cancer. It s also sometimes suitable for men with CPG 3
localised prostate ca
--- Chunk 37 ---
y, external beam
radiotherapy or brachytherapy.
Active surveillance is suitable for men with CPG 1 or 2 localised
prostate cancer. It s also sometimes suitable for men with CPG 3
localised prostate cancer, who want to avoid or delay treatment.
Read more in our factsheet, Active surveillance.
Watchful waiting
This is a different way of monitoring prostate cancer that isn t
causing any symptoms or problems. The aim is to monitor the
cancer and avoid or delay treatment and its side effects. If you
do get symptoms, such as problems urinating or bone pain,
you ll be offered hormone therapy to control the cancer and help
manage your symptoms, rather than treatment to get rid
of the cancer.
Watchful waiting involves having fewer tests than active
surveillance. Ask your doctor or nurse what to expect. It s generally
suitable for men with other health problems who aren t fit enough
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 27
for treatments such as surgery or radiotherapy. It might a
--- Chunk 38 ---
ect. It s generally
suitable for men with other health problems who aren t fit enough
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 27
for treatments such as surgery or radiotherapy. It might also be
suitable if your prostate cancer isn t likely to cause problems during
your lifetime or shorten your life.
Read more in our fact sheet, Watchful waiting.
Monitoring your cancer
If you re offered active surveillance or watchful waiting, make
sure you know which one your doctor is talking about. There are
key differences between them. These terms aren t always used
in the same way, and some doctors use different names such as
 active monitoring  and  wait and see . Ask your doctor to explain
exactly what they mean if you re not sure.
Surgery (radical prostatectomy)
This is an operation to remove the whole prostate, including the
cancer inside it. Your surgeon will also remove the seminal vesicles
  two glands that lie behind the prostate and produce some of the
fluid in semen. They ma
--- Chunk 39 ---
 remove the whole prostate, including the
cancer inside it. Your surgeon will also remove the seminal vesicles
  two glands that lie behind the prostate and produce some of the
fluid in semen. They may also remove nearby lymph nodes if there
is a risk that the cancer has spread there.
There are three types of operation:
  robot-assisted keyhole surgery (da Vinci  robot)
  keyhole (laparoscopic) surgery by hand
  open surgery.
Surgery is usually offered to men with localised prostate cancer
who are fit and healthy. It may also be an option for some men with
locally advanced prostate cancer if the surgeon thinks it s possible
to remove all the cancer that has spread outside the prostate.
28 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Side effects can include leaking urine and erection problems. Side
effects may improve over time but some men have side effects for
longer. There are treatments available to help manage them.
After surgery, you won t be able to ejaculate any semen.
--- Chunk 40 ---
ion problems. Side
effects may improve over time but some men have side effects for
longer. There are treatments available to help manage them.
After surgery, you won t be able to ejaculate any semen. But you
can still feel the sensation of orgasm, but this may be less intense
than before. Surgery will affect your ability to have children (fertility).
If you re planning on having children, you may be able to store your
sperm before the operation for use in fertility treatment.
Read more about surgery, including the side effects, in our fact
sheet, Surgery: radical prostatectomy.
External beam radiotherapy
This treatment uses high-energy X-ray beams to destroy (kill)
cancer cells from outside the body. These beams damage the cells
and stop them from growing and spreading to other parts of the
body. External beam radiotherapy treats the whole prostate, and
sometimes the area around it.
Radiotherapy is suitable for men with localised and locally
advanced prostate cancer, who will often ha
--- Chunk 41 ---
he
body. External beam radiotherapy treats the whole prostate, and
sometimes the area around it.
Radiotherapy is suitable for men with localised and locally
advanced prostate cancer, who will often have it with hormone
therapy. You may have hormone therapy for six months before,
during or after treatment. Your doctor may decide to give you
hormone therapy for a shorter or longer period of time. For
example, if there is a risk of the cancer spreading outside of
the prostate to other parts of the body, you may have hormone
therapy for up to three years.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 29
If you ve just been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer, you
may be offered external beam radiotherapy alongside your main
treatment. External beam radiotherapy won t cure your cancer but
research shows radiotherapy to the prostate can help some men
who have just been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer
to live longer. This isn t suitable for all men and will depend on
how fa
--- Chunk 42 ---
r but
research shows radiotherapy to the prostate can help some men
who have just been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer
to live longer. This isn t suitable for all men and will depend on
how far your cancer has spread. Read more in our fact sheet,
Radiotherapy for advanced prostate cancer.
Side effects can include problems urinating, bowel problems such
as passing loose or watery bowel movements (diarrhoea), erection
problems, and extreme tiredness (fatigue). Side effects can develop
during treatment and may get better with time. But for some men
they can be long-term. And some men may develop side effects
several months or years after having radiotherapy. There are
treatments available to help manage side effects.
Read more about external beam radiotherapy, including the side
effects, in our fact sheet, External beam radiotherapy.
Brachytherapy
This is a type of internal radiotherapy. There are two types of
brachytherapy   permanent seed brachytherapy and high dose-
rate brachy
--- Chunk 43 ---
ts, in our fact sheet, External beam radiotherapy.
Brachytherapy
This is a type of internal radiotherapy. There are two types of
brachytherapy   permanent seed brachytherapy and high dose-
rate brachytherapy.
  Permanent seed brachytherapy, also called low dose-rate
brachytherapy, involves putting tiny radioactive seeds into the
prostate. The seeds release radiation for 8 to 10 months but
stay in the prostate forever. You may have permanent seed
brachytherapy on its own if you have localised prostate cancer
that has a low or medium risk of spreading.
30 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
  High dose-rate (HDR) brachytherapy, also called temporary
brachytherapy, involves putting thin, hollow needles into the
prostate. A source of radiation is then passed down the needles
into the prostate for a few minutes to destroy cancer cells. The
source of radiation is then removed, so no radiation is left inside
your body. You may have HDR brachytherapy on its own to
treat local
--- Chunk 44 ---
into the prostate for a few minutes to destroy cancer cells. The
source of radiation is then removed, so no radiation is left inside
your body. You may have HDR brachytherapy on its own to
treat localised prostate cancer that has a low or medium risk
of spreading.
If you have localised or locally advanced prostate cancer, you may
have brachytherapy together with external beam radiotherapy to
give an extra dose of radiation to the prostate. This is known as a
brachytherapy  boost . You might have hormone therapy to shrink
the prostate for a few months before starting brachytherapy.
Side effects can include urinary and erection problems. Men who
have brachytherapy may also get bowel problems, although these
tend to be mild. There are treatments available to help manage
these side effects.
Read more about brachytherapy, including the side effects, in our
fact sheets, Permanent seed brachytherapy and High dose-rate
brachytherapy.
Hormone therapy
Prostate cancer cells usually need the hormo
--- Chunk 45 ---
ad more about brachytherapy, including the side effects, in our
fact sheets, Permanent seed brachytherapy and High dose-rate
brachytherapy.
Hormone therapy
Prostate cancer cells usually need the hormone testosterone to
grow. Hormone therapy works by either stopping your body from
making testosterone, or by stopping testosterone from reaching
the cancer cells. It will treat all prostate cancer cells, wherever they
are in the body. Hormone therapy won t get rid of your prostate
cancer, but it can keep the cancer under control, often for years.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 31
Hormone therapy is often used with radiotherapy to treat localised
or locally advanced prostate cancer. Hormone therapy will be a
life-long treatment for most men with advanced prostate cancer.
If you ve just been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer,
you may be offered chemotherapy and sometimes external beam
radiotherapy at the same time as your hormone therapy.
There are three main ways 
--- Chunk 46 ---
 you ve just been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer,
you may be offered chemotherapy and sometimes external beam
radiotherapy at the same time as your hormone therapy.
There are three main ways to have hormone therapy for
prostate cancer:
  injections or implants
  tablets
  surgery (orchidectomy) to remove the testicles or the parts of the
testicles that make testosterone.
The side effects of hormone therapy are usually caused by low
testosterone levels. They can include:
  hot flushes
  loss of desire for sex
  problems getting or keeping an erection
  extreme tiredness (fatigue)
  breast swelling or tenderness (gynaecomastia)
  weight gain.
The chances of getting each side effect depend on the type of
hormone therapy you re having and how long you have it for.
There are ways to help manage side effects.
New (second generation) hormone therapy
There are newer types of hormone therapy that can be used
to treat some men with prostate cancer. You may hear them
called new or second
--- Chunk 47 ---
lp manage side effects.
New (second generation) hormone therapy
There are newer types of hormone therapy that can be used
to treat some men with prostate cancer. You may hear them
called new or second-generation hormone therapy. They may
be used in combination with your first-line hormone therapy
treatment, or when your prostate cancer has stopped responding
to other types of hormone therapy.
32 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
They include abiraterone (Zytiga ), enzalutamide (Xtandi ),
apalutamide (Erleada ) and darolutamide (Nubeqa ). Read
more about hormone therapy, including the side effects, in our
publications, Hormone therapy and Living with hormone
therapy: A guide for men with prostate cancer.
High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU)
HIFU uses ultrasound to heat and destroy cancer cells. It s not very
common and only available in specialist centres in the UK or as
part of a clinical trial.
HIFU can be used to treat localised prostate cancer. It may also be
--- Chunk 48 ---
at and destroy cancer cells. It s not very
common and only available in specialist centres in the UK or as
part of a clinical trial.
HIFU can be used to treat localised prostate cancer. It may also be
used to treat locally advanced prostate cancer that has only just
started to break out of the prostate. It can also be used to treat
cancer that has come back after radiotherapy.
Read more about HIFU, including possible side effects, in our
factsheet, High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU).
Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy uses extreme cold to destroy cancer cells. It s not very
common and only available in specialist centres in the UK or as
part of a clinical trial.
Cryotherapy can be used to treat localised prostate cancer. It may
also be used to treat locally advanced prostate cancer that has
only just started to break out of the prostate. It can also be used to
treat cancer that has come back after radiotherapy.
You can also read more about cryotherapy on our website.
Visit, prostatecanceruk
--- Chunk 49 ---
y just started to break out of the prostate. It can also be used to
treat cancer that has come back after radiotherapy.
You can also read more about cryotherapy on our website.
Visit, prostatecanceruk.org/cryotherapy
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 33
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy uses anti-cancer drugs to kill prostate cancer cells,
wherever they are in the body. It doesn t get rid of prostate cancer,
but it aims to shrink it and slow down its growth.
Chemotherapy is usually used to treat advanced prostate cancer.
It can be used at the same time as hormone therapy in men who
have just been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer. It can
also be given to men whose cancer has stopped responding to
hormone therapy (see page 34). It is sometimes used in addition
to other treatments to treat localised and locally advanced prostate
cancer that your doctor thinks could have a high chance of
spreading to other parts of the body.
You need to be quite fit to have chemotherapy b
--- Chunk 50 ---
tments to treat localised and locally advanced prostate
cancer that your doctor thinks could have a high chance of
spreading to other parts of the body.
You need to be quite fit to have chemotherapy because the
side effects can be harder to deal with if you have other health
problems. Side effects include extreme tiredness (fatigue), feeling
and being sick, loss of appetite, hair loss, bowel problems, a
sore mouth, and being less able to fight off infections. These side
effects usually gradually improve after you finish treatment. Read
more about chemotherapy in our fact sheet, Chemotherapy.
Triplet therapy
This is a new treatment that combines the hormone therapy,
darolutamide with both standard hormone therapy and
chemotherapy (docetaxel). Triplet therapy is a treatment for
men with newly diagnosed hormone-sensitive advanced prostate
cancer. This means your prostate cancer has spread to other
parts of the body but can be treated with hormone therapy.
Triplet therapy had been shown to
--- Chunk 51 ---
y diagnosed hormone-sensitive advanced prostate
cancer. This means your prostate cancer has spread to other
parts of the body but can be treated with hormone therapy.
Triplet therapy had been shown to help some men live longer.
It won t cure your prostate cancer, but it may help keep it
under control. Read more on our website, visit
prostatecanceruk.org/triplet-therapy
34 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Further treatments to control advanced prostate cancer
Hormone therapy, often with chemotherapy, is a common first
treatment for advanced prostate cancer. Over time, hormone
therapy may become less effective, but there are other treatments
available that can help control the cancer and help men live longer.
  More hormone therapy can help control your cancer. You
might be offered newer types called abiraterone (Zytiga ) or
enzalutamide (Xtandi ).
  More chemotherapy might be an option if your hormone
therapy is no longer working so well.
  Radium-223 (Xofigo ) is a
--- Chunk 52 ---
 be offered newer types called abiraterone (Zytiga ) or
enzalutamide (Xtandi ).
  More chemotherapy might be an option if your hormone
therapy is no longer working so well.
  Radium-223 (Xofigo ) is a type of internal radiotherapy. It can
help some men whose cancer has spread to the bones to live
longer, and can also help reduce bone pain.
  Steroids can stop the body from producing as much
testosterone. They may also help improve your appetite and
energy levels, and can treat pain.
  Olaparib (Lynparza ) is a drug used to treat men who are
known to have a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene change (mutation), and
whose hormone therapy is no longer working so well.
Read more in our fact sheet, Treatment options after your first
hormone therapy.
Treatments to manage the symptoms of advanced
prostate cancer
If you ve been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer and
have symptoms such as bone pain, there are treatments to
manage these.
  Pain-relieving drugs can help manage any pain.
Specialist Nurses 08
--- Chunk 53 ---

If you ve been diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer and
have symptoms such as bone pain, there are treatments to
manage these.
  Pain-relieving drugs can help manage any pain.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 35
  Radiotherapy can slow down the growth of the cancer and
manage symptoms.
  Drugs called bisphosphonates can strengthen the bones in
men whose bones have been weakened by their prostate cancer
or by hormone therapy. Bisphosphonates are also sometimes
used to help relieve and prevent further bone pain.
Read more about these and other treatments to help manage
symptoms of advanced prostate cancer in our fact sheets,
Managing pain in advanced prostate cancer, Radiotherapy for
advanced prostate cancer and Bisphosphonates for advanced
prostate cancer.
Clinical trials
A clinical trial is a type of medical research. Clinical trials aim to
find new and improved ways of preventing, diagnosing, treating
and managing health problems such as prostate cancer. You ca
--- Chunk 54 ---
rials
A clinical trial is a type of medical research. Clinical trials aim to
find new and improved ways of preventing, diagnosing, treating
and managing health problems such as prostate cancer. You can
ask your doctor or nurse if there are any clinical trials you could
take part in, or speak to our Specialist Nurses.
You can also find details of some clinical trials for prostate cancer
at www.cancerresearchuk.org/trials. Read more on our website
at prostatecanceruk.org/clinical-trials
Choosing a treatment
Depending on how far your cancer has spread, you may have
a choice of treatments. If so, your doctor or nurse will talk you
through your treatment options and help you choose the right type
of monitoring or treatment for you. You might not be able to have
all of the treatments listed in this booklet. Ask your doctor or nurse
which ones are suitable for you.
36 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
It s not always easy to make a decision about treatment and there
are lo
--- Chunk 55 ---
his booklet. Ask your doctor or nurse
which ones are suitable for you.
36 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
It s not always easy to make a decision about treatment and there
are lots of things to think about. These include:
  how far your cancer has spread (its stage)
  how quickly your cancer may be growing
  the advantages and disadvantages of each treatment, including
the possible side effects
  what each treatment involves
  practical things, such as how often you would need to go to
hospital, or how far away your nearest hospital is
  your own thoughts about different treatments
  how the treatment you choose now could affect your treatment
options in the future, if your cancer comes back or spreads
(see page 38)
  your general health
  how long you re expected to live for.
All treatments can have side effects. These will affect everyone
differently, and you might not get all the possible side effects. It s
important to think about how you would cope with the d
--- Chunk 56 ---
live for.
All treatments can have side effects. These will affect everyone
differently, and you might not get all the possible side effects. It s
important to think about how you would cope with the different
side effects when choosing a treatment.
Make sure you have all the information you need, and give yourself
time to think about which treatment is right for you. Your doctor or
nurse can help you think about the advantages and disadvantages.
It can be hard to take everything in when you ve just been
diagnosed. And you may forget exactly what was said. It can
help to write down any questions you might want to ask at your
next appointment. It can also help to take someone with you to
appointments, such as your partner, friend or family member.
You may have telephone or video appointments with your GP,
hospital doctor or specialist nurse. You may want to put the phone
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 37
on speakerphone so that your partner or a family member can al
--- Chunk 57 ---
 with your GP,
hospital doctor or specialist nurse. You may want to put the phone
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 37
on speakerphone so that your partner or a family member can also
listen to the call. If your loved one doesn t live with you, you could
ask if it s possible to include them in the phone call as well.
It can also help to write down or record what s said to help you
remember it. Talk to your doctor or nurse first to make sure they
are happy with you recording the appointment, as not everyone is
comfortable being recorded.
Support when choosing a treatment
There should be a clinical nurse specialist (CNS) in the room
when you get your test results. You should be given their name
and telephone number so that you can get in touch if you have
any questions.
You can also call our Specialist Nurses on 0800 074 8383.
They can help with any questions you have, or put you in touch
with other men who have been diagnosed with prostate cancer.
Page 44 has more inf
--- Chunk 58 ---
u can also call our Specialist Nurses on 0800 074 8383.
They can help with any questions you have, or put you in touch
with other men who have been diagnosed with prostate cancer.
Page 44 has more information on these and other support
services available to you and your loved ones.
I think the most confusing bit was being given
a choice of treatments   you sort of expect to
be told what the treatment will be, not have to
decide yourself. It s a lot to take in.
A personal experience
38 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
If you need further treatment
If your cancer comes back after treatment that aimed to get rid of
it, the first treatment you have had may affect which treatments
you can have in the future.
Some of these treatments may not be suitable for you, so speak to
your doctor or nurse about your own situation.
The table below shows which treatments may be possible
after your first treatment. You might hear these called
second-line treatments.
First treatment fo
--- Chunk 59 ---
your doctor or nurse about your own situation.
The table below shows which treatments may be possible
after your first treatment. You might hear these called
second-line treatments.
First treatment for Second-line treatments that may
prostate cancer be available
Surgery (radical   Radiotherapy to the prostate bed
prostatectomy) (with or without hormone therapy)
  Hormone therapy
External beam   Hormone therapy
radiotherapy   High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU)
  Cryotherapy
  Brachytherapy
  Surgery, but this isn t common
Permanent seed   Hormone therapy
brachytherapy   External beam radiotherapy
or high dose-   More brachytherapy
rate (HDR)   Surgery, but this isn t common
brachytherapy
  Cryotherapy
  HIFU, but this is rare and only offered in
specialist centres
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 39
First treatment for Second-line treatments that may
prostate cancer be available
High-intensity   More HIFU
focused   External beam radiotherapy
ultrasound
  Brachy
--- Chunk 60 ---
00 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 39
First treatment for Second-line treatments that may
prostate cancer be available
High-intensity   More HIFU
focused   External beam radiotherapy
ultrasound
  Brachytherapy
(HIFU)
  Cryotherapy
  Hormone therapy
Cryotherapy   More cryotherapy
  HIFU
  External beam radiotherapy
  Brachytherapy
  Hormone therapy
  Surgery, but this is rare
If your prostate cancer has spread to other parts of your body,
you might be offered chemotherapy at the same time as hormone
therapy. See page 33 for more information.
Read more about treatments that are available if your cancer
comes back in our booklet, If your prostate cancer comes back:
A guide to treatment and support.
40 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
Dealing with prostate cancer
Being diagnosed with prostate cancer can change the way you
think and feel about life. You might feel scared, worried, stressed,
helpless or even angry. Lots of men with prostate cancer get these
kinds of though
--- Chunk 61 ---
osed with prostate cancer can change the way you
think and feel about life. You might feel scared, worried, stressed,
helpless or even angry. Lots of men with prostate cancer get these
kinds of thoughts and feelings. But there s no  right  way to feel
and everyone reacts in their own way.
Finding out about things you can do to help yourself can help you
feel more in control. Families can also find this a difficult time and
they may need support and information too. They may want to
read our booklet, When you re close to someone with prostate
cancer: A guide for partners and family.
Everyone s experience of cancer, whether
you are the patient or the carer, is very, very
unique and I don t think anybody can tell you
how you should behave.
A personal experience
What is my outlook?
You might want to know how prostate cancer will affect you
and whether you are likely to die from prostate cancer. This is
sometimes called your outlook or prognosis. Most prostate cancer
grows slowly and may ne
--- Chunk 62 ---
ant to know how prostate cancer will affect you
and whether you are likely to die from prostate cancer. This is
sometimes called your outlook or prognosis. Most prostate cancer
grows slowly and may never cause any problems or shorten a
man s life. So having prostate cancer doesn t necessarily mean
that you ll die from it.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 41
No one can tell you exactly what will happen, as this will depend
on many things, including the following.
  Your stage. If you are diagnosed with localised prostate cancer,
you may not need treatment or you will have treatment that
aims to get rid of the cancer. If you are diagnosed with locally
advanced prostate cancer, you may have treatment that aims
to get rid of the cancer or keep it under control. If you are
diagnosed with advanced prostate cancer, the treatment won t
cure your cancer but it can help to keep it under control.
  Your Gleason score or grade group. The higher your Gleason
score or grade group
--- Chunk 63 ---
iagnosed with advanced prostate cancer, the treatment won t
cure your cancer but it can help to keep it under control.
  Your Gleason score or grade group. The higher your Gleason
score or grade group, the more aggressive the cancer, and the
more likely it is to spread (see page 11).
  Your PSA level. After you ve been diagnosed, PSA tests are a
good way of monitoring your prostate cancer and seeing how
you re responding to treatment.
  Your treatment options. You may be able to have treatment
aimed at getting rid of the cancer. Or you may be able to have
treatment to keep the cancer under control.
  How successful your treatment is. Your treatment may be
successful at getting rid of your cancer or keeping it under
control. But for some men, treatment may not work as well
as expected.
  Your health. If you have other health problems, you may have
fewer treatment options. And other health conditions may cause
more problems than your prostate cancer.
Most men are diagnosed at a stage whe
--- Chunk 64 ---
ur health. If you have other health problems, you may have
fewer treatment options. And other health conditions may cause
more problems than your prostate cancer.
Most men are diagnosed at a stage where treatment can
either get rid of their cancer, or keep it under control. But a
small number of men are diagnosed with cancer that is already
very advanced.
42 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
If your doctor has explained that this is the case you may want to
read our information on what to expect at prostatecanceruk.org/
advanced-prostate-cancer
For more information about outlook and statistics for men with
prostate cancer, visit www.cancerresearchuk.org. The figures
they provide are a general guide and they cannot tell you exactly
what will happen to you. Speak to your doctor or nurse about your
own situation.
Talking to your family
You might be worried about telling your friends and family that
you have cancer. You might be concerned about how they ll
react or if y
--- Chunk 65 ---
doctor or nurse about your
own situation.
Talking to your family
You might be worried about telling your friends and family that
you have cancer. You might be concerned about how they ll
react or if you ll upset them. It can be difficult to know how to start
a conversation. Try to find a quiet place and explain to them that
you have prostate cancer. You might find it helpful to show them
this booklet.
Ask them if they have any questions. If you don t know the
answers, you could write down their questions and ask your
doctor or nurse at your next appointment.
If you don t feel able to tell your friends and family, you could
ask someone you trust to tell people for you. Macmillan Cancer
Support have information that can help you work out where to start
and make these conversations a bit easier. It includes information
about talking to children.
Talking to male family members about their own risk of
prostate cancer
If you have brothers or sons, you might want to talk to them about
their o
--- Chunk 66 ---
er. It includes information
about talking to children.
Talking to male family members about their own risk of
prostate cancer
If you have brothers or sons, you might want to talk to them about
their own risk of prostate cancer. This is because men are two
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 43
and a half times more likely to get prostate cancer if their father or
brother has had it, compared to someone who doesn t have any
relatives who have been diagnosed with prostate cancer. They
should talk to their doctor or nurse about their risk, particularly if
they are 45 or over. Read more about this in our booklet, Know
your prostate: A guide to common prostate problems.
How can I help myself?
Everyone has their own way of dealing with prostate cancer, but
you may find some of the following suggestions helpful.
  Look into your treatment options. Ask your nurse or doctor
about any side effects so you know what to expect and how to
manage them.
  Talk to someone. Share what y
--- Chunk 67 ---
he following suggestions helpful.
  Look into your treatment options. Ask your nurse or doctor
about any side effects so you know what to expect and how to
manage them.
  Talk to someone. Share what you re thinking   find someone
you can talk to. It could be someone close or someone trained
to listen, like a counsellor or your doctor or nurse.
  Set yourself goals and things to look forward to. Even if
they re just for the next few weeks or months.
  Look after yourself. Take time out to look after yourself. When
you feel up to it, learn some techniques to manage stress and
to relax   like breathing exercises or listening to music. If you re
having difficulty sleeping, talk to your doctor or nurse.
  Eat healthily. It s good for your general health and can help
you stay a healthy weight, which may be important for men with
prostate cancer. Certain changes to your diet may also help with
some side effects of treatment. Read our fact sheet, Diet and
physical activity for men with prostat
--- Chunk 68 ---
hich may be important for men with
prostate cancer. Certain changes to your diet may also help with
some side effects of treatment. Read our fact sheet, Diet and
physical activity for men with prostate cancer.
44 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
  Be as active as you can. Keeping active can improve your
physical strength and fitness, and can lift your mood. It can also
help with some side effects of treatment. Take things at your
own pace and don t overdo it. Read more in our fact sheet,
Diet and physical activity for men with prostate cancer.
Get more tips on how to look after yourself from Macmillan Cancer
Support, Maggie s, Penny Brohn UK, or your nearest cancer
support centre. You can also find more ideas in our booklet, Living
with and after prostate cancer: A guide to physical, emotional
and practical issues.
Who else can help?
Your medical team
You might find it useful to speak to your nurse, doctor, GP or
someone else in your medical team. They can explain 
--- Chunk 69 ---
de to physical, emotional
and practical issues.
Who else can help?
Your medical team
You might find it useful to speak to your nurse, doctor, GP or
someone else in your medical team. They can explain your
diagnosis, treatment and side effects, listen to your concerns, and
put you in touch with other people who can help.
Trained counsellors
Many hospitals have counsellors or psychologists who specialise
in helping people with cancer   ask your doctor or nurse if this is
available. You can also refer yourself for counselling on the NHS
website, or you could see a private counsellor. To find out more,
visit www.nhs.uk/counselling or contact the British Association
for Counselling & Psychotherapy.
Support groups
People affected by prostate cancer get together to share their
experiences of living with it. You can ask questions, share worries
and know that someone understands what you re going through..
Some groups also hold meetings online. Some groups have been
set up by health professiona
--- Chunk 70 ---
ng with it. You can ask questions, share worries
and know that someone understands what you re going through..
Some groups also hold meetings online. Some groups have been
set up by health professionals, others by men themselves.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 45
There is nothing like talking to someone
who has been there.
A personal experience
Prostate Cancer UK services
We have a range of services to help you deal with problems
caused by prostate cancer or its treatments, including:
  our Specialist Nurses, who can help with questions or worries
in confidence
  our one-to-one support service, where you can speak to
someone who understands what you re going through
  our online community, a place to ask questions or
share experiences
  our sexual support service, speak to one of our trained
Specialist Nurses about sexual problems after treatment for
prostate cancer
  our fatigue support, speak to our Specialist Nurses about ways
to help manage your fatigue.
To fi
--- Chunk 71 ---
ak to one of our trained
Specialist Nurses about sexual problems after treatment for
prostate cancer
  our fatigue support, speak to our Specialist Nurses about ways
to help manage your fatigue.
To find out more about any of these services, visit
prostatecanceruk.org/get-support or call our
Specialist Nurses on 0800 074 8383.
46 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
I found talking on the phone to an
experienced Prostate Cancer UK nurse
very helpful.
A personal experience
Spiritual support
You might begin to think more about spiritual beliefs as a result of
having prostate cancer. You could get spiritual support from your
friends, family, religious leader or faith group.
Practical issues
You might need to make decisions about things like work and money.
Read more about this in our booklet, Living with and after prostate
cancer: A guide to physical, emotional and practical issues.
Free prescription
If you live in England and are having treatment for cancer, including
tre
--- Chunk 72 ---
 in our booklet, Living with and after prostate
cancer: A guide to physical, emotional and practical issues.
Free prescription
If you live in England and are having treatment for cancer, including
treatments for symptoms or side effects, you are entitled to
free prescriptions. You ll need to apply for a medical exemption
certificate. Ask your doctor for an FP92A form. Once you have
filled out the form, your doctor will need to sign it, and the
certificate will be sent to you. You will need to take the certificate
with you whenever you collect a prescription. You can find out
more about free prescriptions on the NHS website.
If you live in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland, all prescriptions
are free.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 47
What are my test results?
Use this section with your doctor or nurse to write down your test
results and appointment dates.
PSA level at diagnosis:
MRI scan results:
Number of biopsy samples taken:
Number of biopsy samples that cont
--- Chunk 73 ---
is section with your doctor or nurse to write down your test
results and appointment dates.
PSA level at diagnosis:
MRI scan results:
Number of biopsy samples taken:
Number of biopsy samples that contain cancer:
Gleason score and grade group:
Cambridge prognostic group (CPG):
T stage at diagnosis (if known):
N stage at diagnosis (if known):
M stage at diagnosis (if known):
Date of further MRI scan (if needed):
Results of MRI scan:
48 Prostate cancer A guide for men who ve just been diagnosed
Date of CT scan (if needed):
Results of CT scan:
Date of bone scan (if needed):
Results of bone scan:
My cancer is (tick one):
localised   contained inside the prostate
locally advanced   starting to break out of the prostate or
spread to the area just outside it
advanced   spread from the prostate to other parts of the body
Treatment plan:
My next appointments are with my (tick those that apply):
urologist
specialist nurse
oncologist
other.
You can write down details of future appointments on page
--- Chunk 74 ---
other parts of the body
Treatment plan:
My next appointments are with my (tick those that apply):
urologist
specialist nurse
oncologist
other.
You can write down details of future appointments on page 52.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 49
Who are my team members?
Use this space to write down the names and contact details
of the health professionals who will be involved in your care.
You may hear them called your multi-disciplinary team (MDT).
They will discuss your individual diagnosis and agree on
which treatment options would be suitable for you.
We ve listed the health professionals who are likely to be most
involved in your care, but you might not see all of them. You re
likely to meet more of them later on when you begin treatment
or have check-ups.
Specialist nurse
You may have a urology, uro-oncology (cancers of the urinary
system, including prostate cancer) or prostate cancer specialist
nurse. You may hear them called a clinical nurse specialist (CNS).
The
--- Chunk 75 ---
rse
You may have a urology, uro-oncology (cancers of the urinary
system, including prostate cancer) or prostate cancer specialist
nurse. You may hear them called a clinical nurse specialist (CNS).
They can answer any questions you may have, and might carry
out some of your tests, treatments and follow-up care.
Name:
Telephone:
Notes:
Main contact (key worker)
Your main point of contact might be called your key worker.
This could be your specialist nurse or another health professional.
They will help to co-ordinate your care, guide you to the
appropriate team member and help you get information.
Name:
Telephone:
Notes:
50 Prostate cancer A guide for men who ve just been diagnosed
Consultant urologist
This type of doctor specialises in the urinary and reproductive
systems, including prostate cancer. Urologists are surgeons.
Name:
Telephone:
Notes:
Consultant oncologist
This type of doctor specialises in cancer treatments other than
surgery, such as radiotherapy or chemotherapy.
Name:
Tel
--- Chunk 76 ---
 cancer. Urologists are surgeons.
Name:
Telephone:
Notes:
Consultant oncologist
This type of doctor specialises in cancer treatments other than
surgery, such as radiotherapy or chemotherapy.
Name:
Telephone:
Notes:
Other health professionals
You can write down contact details of other health professionals
in the space below.
General practitioner (GP):
Practice nurse:
Other health professionals:
Our Specialist Nurses: 0800 074 8383
Your nearest local support group:
You can find out about your nearest local support group from your
nurse, or on our website at prostatecanceruk.org/support-groups
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 51
Questions to ask your doctor
or nurse
Which treatments are available to me?
Are there any clinical trials I could take part in?
How long do I have to decide on my treatment?
Will my treatment aim to get rid of the cancer or to control it?
What are the side effects of the treatment?
What support is available if I do get side effects?
What are t
--- Chunk 77 ---
e to decide on my treatment?
Will my treatment aim to get rid of the cancer or to control it?
What are the side effects of the treatment?
What support is available if I do get side effects?
What are the chances of the treatment being successful?
What happens if the cancer comes back again?
What check-ups will I have after treatment?
Who can I contact if I have questions or concerns?
52 Prostate cancer A guide for men who ve just been diagnosed
Appointment diary
You can fill in this diary before and after your appointments, to help
you get the most out of them. You might want to photocopy these
pages so you have enough copies to last you for a while.
Date of appointment:
Fill in before your appointment
How I ve been feeling   you can include physical things (for
example, side effects of treatment) as well as emotional things.
Things I want to talk about at my appointment:
urinary problems emotional or mood problems
sexual problems diet and physical activity
bowel problems work and finan
--- Chunk 78 ---
atment) as well as emotional things.
Things I want to talk about at my appointment:
urinary problems emotional or mood problems
sexual problems diet and physical activity
bowel problems work and finances
fatigue problems other
Your doctor or nurse may not have time to talk about all of
these things, so think about what is most important to you.
You can also call our Specialist Nurses in confidence.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 53
Fill in during or after your appointment
My questions or concerns
Answers to my questions or concerns
Advice from my doctor or nurse
PSA level
Date and time of next appointment
54 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
More information from us
The Tool Kit
The Tool Kit information pack contains fact sheets that explain
how prostate cancer is diagnosed, how it s treated and how it may
affect your lifestyle. Each treatment fact sheet also includes a list of
suggested questions to ask your doctor. Call our Specialist Nurses

--- Chunk 79 ---
ostate cancer is diagnosed, how it s treated and how it may
affect your lifestyle. Each treatment fact sheet also includes a list of
suggested questions to ask your doctor. Call our Specialist Nurses
for a personally tailored pack.
Leaflets and booklets
We have a range of other leaflets and booklets about prostate
cancer and other prostate problems.
To order publications:
All our publications are free and available to order or download
online. To order them:
  call us on 0800 074 8383
  visit our website at prostatecanceruk.org/publications
Call our Specialist Nurses
If you want to talk about prostate cancer or other prostate
problems, call our Specialist Nurses in confidence. You can also
text NURSE to 70004, or you can email or chat online with our
nurses on our website. Visit prostatecanceruk.org/get-support
Speak to our
Specialist Nurses
0800 074 8383*
prostatecanceruk.org
*Calls are recorded for training purposes only. Confidentiality is maintained between callers
and Prostate Can
--- Chunk 80 ---
nceruk.org/get-support
Speak to our
Specialist Nurses
0800 074 8383*
prostatecanceruk.org
*Calls are recorded for training purposes only. Confidentiality is maintained between callers
and Prostate Cancer UK.
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 55
Other useful organisations
British Association for Counselling & Psychotherapy
www.bacp.co.uk
Telephone: 01455 883 300
Information about counselling and details of therapists in your area.
Cancer Research UK
www.cancerresearchuk.org
Telephone: 0808 800 4040
Information about prostate cancer and clinical trials.
Citizens Advice
www.citizensadvice.org.uk
Telephone: 0800 144 8848 (England), 0800 702 2020 (Wales)
Advice on a range of issues including financial and legal matters.
Find your nearest Citizens Advice in the phonebook or online.
Macmillan Cancer Support
www.macmillan.org.uk
Telephone: 0808 808 0000
Practical, financial and emotional support for people with cancer,
their family and friends.
Maggie s
www.maggies.org
Telep
--- Chunk 81 ---
line.
Macmillan Cancer Support
www.macmillan.org.uk
Telephone: 0808 808 0000
Practical, financial and emotional support for people with cancer,
their family and friends.
Maggie s
www.maggies.org
Telephone: 0300 123 1801
Drop-in centres for cancer information and support, and online
support groups.
56 Prostate cancer A guide if you ve just been diagnosed
NHS websites
England: www.nhs.uk
Scotland: www.nhsinform.scot
Wales: www.111.wales.nhs.uk
nidirect (Northern Ireland)
www.nidirect.gov.uk
Penny Brohn UK
www.pennybrohn.org.uk
Telephone: 0303 3000 118
Courses and physical, emotional and spiritual support for people
with cancer and their loved ones.
Samaritans
www.samaritans.org
Telephone: 116 123
Confidential, judgement-free emotional support, 24 hours a day, by
telephone, email, letter or face to face.
Tell us what you think
Fill out our quick feedback form by scanning
this QR code with your phone (or other device)
to let us know your thoughts on this publication.
Or visit: prostatecanc
--- Chunk 82 ---
ace to face.
Tell us what you think
Fill out our quick feedback form by scanning
this QR code with your phone (or other device)
to let us know your thoughts on this publication.
Or visit: prostatecanceruk.org/feedback-dia
Or email any comments about our publications
to: yourfeedback@prostatecanceruk.org
Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 57
About us
Prostate Cancer UK has a simple ambition: to stop men dying
from prostate cancer   by driving improvements in prevention,
diagnosis, treatment and support.
At Prostate Cancer UK, we take great care to provide up-to-date,
unbiased and accurate facts about prostate diseases. We hope
these will add to the medical advice you have had and help you
to make decisions. Our services are not intended to replace
advice from your doctor.
References to sources of information used in the production of
this booklet are available at prostatecanceruk.org
This publication was written and edited by
our Health Information team.
It was reviewe
--- Chunk 83 ---
References to sources of information used in the production of
this booklet are available at prostatecanceruk.org
This publication was written and edited by
our Health Information team.
It was reviewed by:
  Peter Hoskin, Consultant Clinical Oncologist, Mount Vernon
Cancer Centre and Professor of Clinical Oncology, Division of
Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester
  Alissa Lewis, Uro-oncology Clinical Nurse Specialist, Bradford
Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
  Alastair Thomson, Consultant Clinical Oncologist, Royal Cornwall
Hospitals NHS Trust
  Our Specialist Nurses
  Our volunteers.

Specialist Nurses 0800 074 8383 prostatecanceruk.org 59
Donate today   help others like you
Did you find this information useful? Would you like to help
others in your situation access the facts they need? Every year,
52,000 men face a prostate cancer diagnosis. Thanks to our
generous supporters, we offer information free to all who need it.
If you would like to help us continue this service
--- Chunk 84 ---
 they need? Every year,
52,000 men face a prostate cancer diagnosis. Thanks to our
generous supporters, we offer information free to all who need it.
If you would like to help us continue this service, please consider
making a donation. Your gift could fund the following services:
   10 could buy a Tool Kit   a set of fact sheets, tailored to
the needs of each man with vital information on diagnosis,
treatment and lifestyle.
   25 could give a man diagnosed with prostate cancer
unlimited time to talk over treatment options with one of our
specialist nurses.
To make a donation of any amount, please call us on
0800 082 1616, visit prostatecanceruk.org/donate or text
PROSTATE to 70004 . There are many other ways to support
us. For more details please visit prostatecanceruk.org/get-involved
  You can donate up to  10 via SMS and we will receive 100%
of your donation. Texts are charged at your standard rate.
For full terms and conditions and more information, please
visit prostatecanceruk.o
--- Chunk 85 ---
You can donate up to  10 via SMS and we will receive 100%
of your donation. Texts are charged at your standard rate.
For full terms and conditions and more information, please
visit prostatecanceruk.org/terms
Speak to our
Specialist Nurses
0800 074 8383*
prostatecanceruk.org
Like us on Facebook: Prostate Cancer UK
Follow us on Twitter: @ProstateUK
  Prostate Cancer UK May 2023
To be reviewed May 2026
Call our Specialist Nurses from Monday to Friday 9am - 5pm,
Wednesday 10am - 5pm
* Calls are recorded for training purposes only.
Confidentiality is maintained between callers and Prostate Cancer UK.
Prostate Cancer UK is a registered charity in England and Wales (1005541)
and in Scotland (SC039332). Registered company number 02653887.
7696 DIA/FEB25
